
Some Christians may opt out of computing-related careers by reasoning that: (i) the Bible makes no mention of computers; and (ii) the Bible is our rule of faith and life; so computers must not be important to our faith and/or life. However the Bible does speak extensively about God’s creation, and we have argued elsewhere [1] that computing is a part of God’s creation. Near the beginning of the book of Genesis, we read:

Then God said, “Les us make mankind in our image, in our likeness, and let them rule over the fish of the sea and the birds of the air, over the livestock, over all the earth, and over all creatures that move along the ground.” So God created mankind in his own image, in the image of God he created him; male and female he created them. God blessed them and said to them, “Be fruitful and increase in number; fill the earth and subdue it. Rule over the fish of the sea and the birds of the air and over every living creature that moves on the ground.”

This passage indicates that God created mankind to (among other things) subdue and rule over His creation.1 If computing is indeed a part of God’s creation, then men and women who work to increase mankind’s understanding and mastery of computation (i.e.,
computer scientists) are obeying God’s command with respect to this part of His creation.
 
Another reason some Christians might shun a computing-related career is their view that some careers (e.g., minister, missionary) are more spiritual than others. Under this line of reasoning, the value of one’s work depends on how directly it contributes to the salvation of people’s souls. A “religious” career (e.g., missionary) is thus thought to be better in God’s eyes than a “secular” career (e.g., computer scientist), in this view.

One root of this view is Old Testament Judaism, where special intermediaries (priests) mediated between holy God and sinful people. There, worship consisted of a person bringing an animal to a priest, who killed it as a sacrificial atonement for the person’s sin.

In New Testament Christianity, a priesthood of believers replaces these special priests, and Jesus’ perfect sacrifice replaces ritual animal sacrifices. So how do we as Christians worship in this new era? 

That is, where the Judaic act of worship was the sacrificial offering of an animal, my Christian act of worship is the daily offering of my body as a living sacrifice through which God can work His will. Another way of saying the same thing is that I worship God by doing that to which God calls me, which is also known as my vocation.

Interestingly, even in the Old Testament, God called people to perform tasks like weaving, carving, and metalworking that were not implicitly “spiritual”. He did this by equipping them with abilities, knowledge, and skills that they could use to His glory. This is still true today: when God calls people to a vocation, He equips them with the gifts for that vocation. The gifts God has given us thus provide us with hints as to our vocation – if God has given you the gifts to be a computer scientist, he may well be calling you to that as your vocation!

The notion that some vocations are more spiritual than others is thus false. What matters is that (i) we know what gifts God has given us, (ii) we strive to know God’s will, and (iii) we use our gifts in keeping with that will. Put differently: Whatever you do, work at it with all your heart, as working for the Lord, not men.

In summary, Christians can worship God by serving Him as ministers, computer scientists, janitors, …; in fact, any task to which God calls them. Men and women whom God calls to be computer scientists, and who pursue this vocation in a way that is holy and pleasing to God, can thus do so as an act of worship.

Another reason some Christians might avoid a career in computer science is their belief that people should invest their resources in endeavors with eternal consequences: Do not store up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and rust destroy, and where thieves break in and steal. But store up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where moth and rust do not destroy, and where thieves do not steal. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

In this view, people who engage in temporal concerns (e.g., writing software or designing computer systems) are storing up treasure on earth, whereas those who engage in eternal concerns (e.g., saving people’s souls) are storing up treasure in heaven. With a little thought, it should be evident that this is a different version of the same spiritual/secular vocational dichotomy we have previously argued is false. One can be a computer scientist without storing up “treasures on earth.” (One can also be a pastor or missionary without storing up “treasures in heaven.”) Jesus’ point is this: What drives our day-to-day lives? On what do we spend our time? On what do we spend our money? When push comes to shove, what motivates us?

There are many possible motivations for being a computer scientist, including the job security, the financial rewards, the status of working in hi-tech, and so on. These are clearly “treasures on earth” – not especially Christian motivations. However there are good motivations for Christians to become computer scientists. One such motivation is service. 

In a world that is increasingly driven by information, Christians with computational skills can use those skills in a wide variety of Christ-honoring ways, ranging from helping to bridge the “digital divide” between information haves and have-nots, to applying computational linguistics to facilitate Bible translation in an organization like Wycliffe Translators, to working to inject Christ’s values into our materialistic tech-culture.

Another motivation is the joy that results from writing a program that works beautifully, designing an optimal algorithm, or crafting an elegant proof. Why do these activities elicit joy from within us? Genesis 1 and 2 teach that God created humans in His image, one facet of which is His creativity. By allowing us to express creativity, computer science lets us embody this aspect of God’s image within us. It is not a coincidence that imitating God in this way brings about a sense of joy and fulfillment!

Another motivation is to know God better. Boyle, Keppler, Newton, Pascal, and other early scientists were motivated to discover the laws of God’s creation, in order to better understand their Creator. Similarly, a theoretical computer scientist seeks to discover the limits of computation – computational laws [1]. As we discover the limits God has placed upon computing, we learn more about Him and thus know Him better.

A final reason some Christians might avoid a career in computer science is their belief that when Jesus comes again, things that are “of the world” will be consumed in the fire of His return. In this view, computers and other technologies will not exist after Jesus returns, so why waste our energies on such things? One problem with this view is the teaching of Genesis 1 and 2 in which God calls us to exercise dominion over and be stewards of His creation. If the creation is simply going to be burned away to nothing, what is the point?

In short, the earth will disappear in fire when Jesus returns, but a new earth will appear in its place, that will contain a city in which God will dwell among his people, and to which the nations of this new earth will bring their treasures.

Regarding these treasures, there would seem to be two possibilities: One is that these treasures are created after the destruction of our earth, using the perfect resources of the new earth. This possibility unfortunately leaves unanswered the question of why we should fulfill our duties as God’s stewards of this creation.

Another possibility is that these treasures are created on our earth, and have been refined and purified by the fire of Christ’s return. This possibility – that what we do in this world can survive (cleansed of impurities) into the new earth – motivates us to fulfill our mandate to serve God as His stewards by working to better our world. If correct, then it is an interesting thought-exercise to speculate on how computer systems that survive to the new earth (cleansed of their impurities) would be different from those of this earth.

The idea that what we do on this earth can survive the end of this world is not new. Tradition has it that Martin Luther said, “If I believed the world were ending tomorrow, I would plant a tree today.” Luther’s statement suggests that what we do on this earth can have eternal worth – if it is a thing God would consider to be good.

Computer science is a discipline with two aspects. On the one side it is an engineering discipline: it involves the planning, design, develop, and maintenance of computer systems. Its subject matter is a corpus of techniques for analyzing problems, developing solutions that won't collapse, guaranteeing and measuring the robustness of programs. On the other hand, I believe that it is also a science in the sense that mathematics is a science. It is the study of computation and computability, the study of algorithm. It does not frequently use the hypothesis-test method of studying nature, but it does involve the study of nature, in my opinion. The discovery of an aesthetically pleasing algorithmic solution to a difficult problem, the elucidation of the properties of the algorithm – these are ways of learning about God's creation. The world is created in such a way that certain problems have efficient solutions and other problems have no algorithmic solution at all. In fact, there is a rich structure to algorithmic complexity. Computer science investigates this structure.

In this scientific approach to the discipline, as we learn about God's creation, we also learn about [every religiion] God. We see something of the infinite riches of his wisdom and knowledge, his grace of hidden riches provided for humanity, his beauty. The appropriate attitude of the computer scientist is doxology. It is wonderful that any computable function can be embodied with a combination of two basic types of logic gates or that simple motions of rods and levers or rebounds of billiard balls can in principle play chess or factor a large number.

I belive, that creation is real and has a certain, fixed nature affects of approach to the discipline. I admit that there may be limits on computability and complexity of problems. We are willing to believe proofs regarding these matters. Yet because creation is fallen, I do not expect to find unadulterated perfection in computing. Even if a simple computer program were proven correct, we might allow for the possibility of hardware failure or a misunderstanding of the original problem. We take appropriate precautions and do not entrust too much to computers. I acknowledge that there will often be harmful as well as beneficial effects in the computerized solution of a problem. And since the brain and the machine use different but functionally equivalent computational processes, the machine can think in the same sense as the brain.